Working Group Proposal for Reference Types (#335)
opencontainers/distribution-spec: spec.md

		2. [Push](#push)
		3. [Content Discovery](#content-discovery)
		4. [Content Management](#content-management)
- [Backwards Compatibility](#backwards-compatibility)

>   - [Unavailable Referrers API](#unavailable-referrers-api)

Reviewer: not sure what if any depth level limits there are in the toc generator we used...

I suppose you could have a links section under the toc for the new 1.1 content changes

- **Push**: the act of uploading Blobs and Manifests to a Registry
- **Pull**: the act of downloading Blobs and Manifests from a Registry
- **Blob**: the binary form of content that is stored by a Registry, addressable by a Digest
- **Manifest**: a JSON document uploaded via the manifests endpoint. A manifest may reference other manifests and blobs in a repository via descriptors. Examples of manifests are defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-2](#appendix)</sup>, such as the Image Manifest, Image Index, and Artifact Manifest.</sup>

> - **Image Index**: a manifest containing a list of manifests, defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-6](#appendix)</sup>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Image Index**: a manifest containing an annotated index of image and artifact manifests, defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-6](#appendix)</sup>.
```

Reviewer 2: Is that accurate? While a registry must support those two specific types, they may support any type of manifest in the list, including an index that references an index, and the docker media types.

> - **Image Manifest**: a manifest containing a config descriptor and list of layer descriptors, commonly used for container images, defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-2](#appendix)</sup>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Image Manifest**: a manifest containing a config descriptor and an indexed list of layers, commonly used for container images, defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-2](#appendix)</sup>.
```
don't see the removal of index requirement in the image spec changes... so thinking we need to keep with the existing // define

> - **Artifact Manifest**: a manifest containing a list of blob descriptors, defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-7](#appendix)</sup>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Artifact Manifest**: a manifest containing a collection of blobs, defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-7](#appendix)</sup>.
```

- **Config**: a blob referenced in the Image Manifest which contains metadata. Config is defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-4](#appendix)</sup>.

> - **Object**: one conceptual piece of content stored as Blobs with an accompanying Manifest. (This was previously described as an "Artifact", and has been renamed to avoid confusion with the "Artifact Manifest".)

Reviewer: hmmm..

> - **Object**: one conceptual piece of content stored as Blobs with an accompanying Manifest. (This was previously described as an "Artifact", and has been renamed to avoid confusion with the "Artifact Manifest".)

Reviewer: nod

> - **Descriptor**: a unique reference to content, either a Manifest or Blob, using a media type, Digest, and size. Descriptors are defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-5](#appendix)</sup>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Descriptor**: a reference that describes the type, metadata and content address of referenced content. Descriptors are defined under the OCI Image Spec <sup>[apdx-5](#appendix)</sup>
```
see definition in image spec..

#### Pull

> The process of pulling an Object centers around retrieving two components: the manifest and one or more blobs.

Reviewer 3: seems odd to see "Object" capitalized

Reviewer 3: i get it that it refers to https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/pull/335/files#diff-bc6661da34ecae62fbe724bb93fd69b91a7f81143f2683a81163231de7e3b545R74, but without wikipedia-level linking, it seems odd

A useful diagram is provided [here](https://github.com/google/go-containerregistry/tree/d7f8d06c87ed209507dd5f2d723267fe35b38a9f/pkg/v1/remote#anatomy-of-an-image-upload).

A registry MAY reject a manifest of any type uploaded to the manifest endpoint if it references manifests or blobs that do not exist in the registry.

> A registry SHOULD accept a manifest with a `refers` field that references a manifest that does not exist.

Reviewer 4: @AkihiroSuda I recall seeing a comment from you that this name is confusing. If you have a suggestion, we'd be happy to use it :)

Reviewer: I think the word(s) are fine.. Issue is more related to refers and referrers are not defined as terms in the document and because http referer is so similar but not related .. the definitions of these two new terms should be contrasted with the http use.

Reviewer 2: They've now been defined in the Definitions section.

> A registry SHOULD accept a manifest with a `refers` field that references a manifest that does not exist.

Reviewer: kk trying to figure out then why it's not a MUST... and what the transaction requirement for the set of artifacts means.. to pull and push

> A registry SHOULD accept a manifest with a `refers` field that references a manifest that does not exist.

Reviewer 3: too bad there isn't a return value that could be returned _even as_ the manifest is accepted.
So the server could allow the push, and say "REFERS_BLOB_UNKNOWN" or similar

A registry that enforces this limit SHOULD respond to a request to push a manifest over this limit with a response code `413 Payload Too Large`.
Client and registry implementations SHOULD expect to be able to support manifest pushes of at least 4 megabytes.

###### Pushing Manifests with Refers

When pushing an Image or Artifact manifest with the `Refers` field and the [Referrers API](#listing-referrers) returns a 404, the client MUST:

> 1. Pull the Index using the [referrers tag schema](#referrers-tag-schema).

Reviewer 2: I'm updating this to call it the Referrers list rather than the Index to hopefully reduce confusion.

A registry that enforces this limit SHOULD respond to a request to push a manifest over this limit with a response code `413 Payload Too Large`.
Client and registry implementations SHOULD expect to be able to support manifest pushes of at least 4 megabytes.

###### Pushing Manifests with Refers

When pushing an Image or Artifact Manifest with the `refers` field and the [Referrers API](#listing-referrers) returns a 404, the client MUST:

1. Pull the current Referrers list using the [referrers tag schema](#referrers-tag-schema).
1. If that pull returns a Manifest other than the expected Image Index, the client SHOULD report a failure and skip the remaining steps.
1. If the tag returns a 404, the client MUST begin with an empty Image Index.
1. Verify the descriptor for the manifest is not already in the Referrers list (duplicate entries SHOULD NOT be created).
1. Append a descriptor for the pushed Image or Artifact Manifest to the manifests in the Referrers list.
   The value of the `artifactType` MUST be set in the descriptor to value of the `artifactType` in the Artifact Manifest, or the Config descriptor `mediaType` in the Image Manifest.

>    All annotations from the Image or Artifact Manifest MUST be copied to this descriptor.

Reviewer 3: what if they update values, need to delete, or otherwise need to merge? Any advice for readers.

When using the `last` query parameter, the `n` parameter is OPTIONAL.

##### Listing Referrers

*Note: this feature was added in distibution-spec 1.1.

> Clients should see [client-implementation.md](client-implementation.md) for more details on implementing this.

Reviewer: cross referencing two documents, bouncing back and forth, to find out the total of what must be implemented makes it hard for reader/implementor.

Reviewer 2: The current spec felt focused on registry server concerns. Adding details for what clients should do when a server doesn't provide the API felt client specific, and not really part of the API spec. Should these two be merged, or is there a better way to separate the interest?

Reviewer: it's currently merged as one api reference.. see references to client(s) required actions..

Reviewer 2: Okay, I can work on moving this into one doc. To verify, you're not concerned this is talking about how to integrate with 1.0 registries in the 1.1 spec?

Reviewer: nod, since the changes put requirements on the existing api implementations (client and server) I think we need those requirements to be in one doc.. 

I also think it's fair to include how to integrate with 1.0 registries as a separate section for push.. just have to high light "for clients implementing this version of the spec > 1.0 care MUST be taken to be backwards compatible with 1.0 registries that do not have support for artifact manifests, refers in image manifests, and artifact manifests in image.index.."

Registries should see [upgrading.md](upgrading.md) before enabling this.*

To fetch the list of referrers, perform a `GET` request to a path in the following format: `/v2/<name>/referrers/<reference>` <sup>[end-12a](#endpoints)</sup>.

`<name>` is the namespace of the repository.
Assuming a repository is found, this request MUST return a `200 OK` response code.

Upon success, the response MUST be a JSON body with an Index containing a list of descriptors.
Each descriptor is of an Image or Artifact manifest in the same `<name>` namespace with a `refers` field that specifies the value of `<reference>`.
The descriptors MUST include an `artifactType` field that is set to the value of `artifactType` for an Artifact manifest if present, or the configuration descriptor's `mediaType` for an Image manifest.
The descriptors MUST include annotations from the manifest of the Image or Artifact.
If a query results in no matching referrers, an empty manifest list MUST be returned.
If `<ref>` does not exist, a registry MAY return an empty list.

```json

> {

Reviewer: noting that this example is not included in the image spec PR...

Reviewer 2: In this context, it's similar to having the tag listing output displayed in the section above. While we use the Index spec, the part we want to capture is how that Index is generated by the server and what content must be included in the descriptors and annotations.

Reviewer: right.. if json has comments would be nice to note in the json that this was a generated image.index .. not a pushed image.index  

I'm having difficulty figuring out use patterns with this PR for adding artifact manifests pre image.index manifest push, and post image.index manifest push (both in the case where the referrers api is fully supported/registry and client are both using proposed new fields). I get that In the pre push pattern would the referrers api on the registry only pull from the image.index manifests.. or is there some expectation that manifests with a refers would be otherwise indexed in another manner than with image.index manifests in some sort of refers db?  Is there an expectation for using both a db and image.index for artifacts? I see some implication of such below in upgrading.md 's MUST language but I'm not seeing a requirement that the image.index be inclusive making me wonder what the practice will be for image.index push/pull with artifact manifests included, vs this referrers api with filter and paging support... I can make the guess that it's index+additional image and artifact manifests linked by refers.. and there might be good reason for needing that to reduce updates to the image.index.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand the full question, but when a registry supports the API, we're assuming the registry will maintain an internal DB of refers. There would be no referrers tag schema pointing to an Index that can be separately pulled in that situation (for new objects at least). All updates would be done in that DB and the Index is dynamically generated by the API. Whether the client created tag schema Index manifests are deleted after the API is enabled is a choice for the registry.

We document what manifests registries must include in that DB below because scanning all existing manifests for the refers field may be excessive for large registries.

Reviewer: can I push an image.index with artifacts and image manifests that include refers ..  

can I push an image.index with artifacts that do not include refers..

based on those answers:

is there an implied refer for the image.index when it includes an artifact without a refer reference

is an artifact included in the image.index required to include a refer to one of the manifest image/image index/other artifact via refer

Reviewer: appears the answers could all be yes, moving this question/issue to the punch list... to be covered in later pr(s)

When using the `last` query parameter, the `n` parameter is OPTIONAL.

##### Listing Referrers

> *Note: this feature was added in distibution-spec 1.1.

Reviewer 3: are we confirmed that this would only be in a point release?

Reviewer 2: Yes!

Registries should see [Enabling the Referrers API](#enabling-the-referrers-api) before enabling this.*

> To fetch the list of referrers, perform a `GET` request to a path in the following format: `/v2/<name>/referrers/<reference>` <sup>[end-12a](#endpoints)</sup>.

Reviewer 3: Reading through this and the examples below, I'm not actually clear on what string `<reference>` actually is. Media Type? digest? arbitrary value?

      "digest": "sha256:a2a2a2...",
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.example.signature.v1",
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.artifact.created": "2022-01-01T07:21:33Z",
        "org.example.signature.fingerprint": "abcd"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

A `Link` header MUST be included in the response when the descriptor list cannot be returned in a single manifest.
Each response is an Image Index with different descriptors in the `manifests` field.
The `Link` header MUST be set according to [RFC5988](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5988.html) with the Relation Type `rel="next"`.

The registry SHOULD support filtering on `artifactType`.
To fetch the list of referrers with a filter, perform a `GET` request to a path in the following format: `/v2/<name>/referrers/<reference>?artifacttype=<mediaType>` <sup>[end-12b](#endpoints)</sup>.
If filtering is requested and applied, the response MUST include an annotation (`org.opencontainers.referrers.filtersApplied`) denoting that an `artifactType` filter was applied.
If multiple filters are applied, the annotation MUST contain a comma separated list of applied filters.

Example request with filtering:

```

> GET /v2/<name>/referrers/<ref>?artifactType=application/vnd.example.sbom.v1

Reviewer 3: it's `<ref>` here, but `<reference>` everywhere else

```

Example response with filtering:

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.index.v1+json",
  "manifests": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "size": 1234,
      "digest": "sha256:a1a1a1...",
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.example.sbom.v1",
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.artifact.created": "2022-01-01T14:42:55Z",
        "org.example.sbom.format": "json"
      }
    }
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.referrers.filtersApplied": "artifactType"
  }
}
```

If the [Referrers API](#listing-referrers) returns a 404, the client MUST fallback to pulling the [referrers tag schema](#referrers-tag-schema).
The response SHOULD be an Image Index with the same content that would be expected from the Referrers API.

> If the response to the [Referrers API](#listing-referrers) is a 404, and the tag schema does not return a valid Image Index, the client SHOULD assume there are no Referrers to the manifest.

Reviewer 3: I would break this out into an "error handling" type section/subsection

Reviewer 3: well, I see 404's below are not quite broken out, so :shrug:

Upon success, the registry MUST respond with a `202 Accepted` code.
If the repository does not exist, the response MUST return `404 Not Found`.

When deleting an Image or Artifact manifest that contains a `refers` field, and the [Referrers API](#listing-referrers) returns a 404, clients SHOULD:

1. Pull the Image Index using the [referrers tag schema](#referrers-tag-schema).

> 1. Delete the descriptor from the manifest list to the deleted manifest.

Reviewer 5: Minor, but I personally found the second step language a bit difficult to parse; maybe because "manifest list" is a known image type from the Docker v2 spec. Once I understood that **list** refers to the index's array of manifests it made more sense, but here's a potential reword (that also gets rid of the word "delete" since the verb "delete" isn't the most natural word to use with array operations, IMO):

*Remove the descriptor entry from the array of manifests that references the deleted manifest.*

Reviewer 2: Makes sense, PR updated. Thanks!

Upon success, the registry MUST respond with code `202 Accepted`.
If the blob is not found, a `404 Not Found` code MUST be returned.

### Backwards Compatibility

Client implementations MUST support registries that implement partial or older versions of the OCI Distribution Spec.

> This section describes client fallback procedures that MUST be implemented when a new/optional API is not available from a Registry.

Reviewer 3: right, so, if there is a backward-compat condition, then is it _required_ that this feature bumps the version to 1.1?

A client querying the [Referrers API](#listing-referrers) and receiving a 404 MUST fallback to using an Image Index pushed to a tag described by the [referrers tag schema](#referrers-tag-schema).

##### Referrers Tag Schema

```text
<alg>-<ref>
```

- `<alg>`: the digest algorithm (e.g. `sha256` or `sha512`)
- `<ref>`: the digest from the `refers` field (limit of 64 characters)

For example, a manifest with the `refers` field digest set to `sha256:aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa` in the `registry.example.org/project` repository would have a descriptor in the Referrers list at `registry.example.org/project:sha256-aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa`.

This tag should return an Image Index matching the expected response of the [Referrers API](#listing-referrers).
Maintaining the content of this tag is the responsibility of clients pushing and deleting Image and Artifact Manifests that contain a `refers` field.

> Multiple clients could attempt to update the tag simultaneously resulting in race conditions and data loss.

Reviewer 3: `**Note**` or `**Warning**`?
